Feat: add form component (#67)
Atom-Learning/components: src/components/form/Form.mdx

---
title: Form
component: Form
description: Form abstracts form validation logic away from the view code
category: Forms
---

`Form` is a wrapper around an HTML `form` element and the `react-hook-form` library. It manages the `useForm()` instance and handles the validation logic.

`Form` is compatible with all our field components (i.e. `InputField`, not `Input`) and is also compatible with custom fields so long as they accept the following props:

- `error`: `string` (for validation errors)

> - `register`: `React.ForwardedRef<HTMLInputElement>` (only used internally by the `Form` to keep track of the field's value)

Reviewer: I'm assuming that it will take other HTML element types right? If yes maybe we should write it like this
```suggestion
- `register`: `React.ForwardedRef<HTML*Element>` (only used internally by the `Form` to keep track of the field's value)
```

Author: Updated 👍🏻

### Basic validation

The `required` property accepts a `message` and a `value`. `value` is a boolean that represents whether the field is required. That pattern is only necessary when
deciding dynamically whether to make a field required. If it will also be required, you can pass a `string` containing the error message instead. The following two inputs are equivalent:

```tsx center
<Form>
  <InputField name="name" label="Name" validation={{required: {value: true, message: "You must have a name"}}} />
  <InputField name="name" label="Name" validation={{required: "You must have a name"} />
  <Button>Submit</Button>
</Form>
```

The following properties take a `message` and a `value`:

- `min`
- `max`
- `minLength`
- `maxLength`
- `pattern`

For example:

```tsx center
<Form>
  <InputField type="number" name="numCats" label="Number of cats" validation={{min: {value: 3, message: "You must have at least 3 cats!"}}}/>
  <InputField name="faveName" label="Favourite cat name" validation={{maxLength: {{value: 20, message: "Cats hate long names!"}}}} />
  <Button>Submit</Button>
</Form>
```

> If you pass one of those properties the `value` directly, you'll get a default error message:

Reviewer: Wondering if down the line we should block this as we wouldn't be able to translate these defaults. but it is definitely a follow-up ticket we should add to the backlog to remind us

```tsx center
<Form>
  <InputField type="number" name="numCats" label="Number of cats" validation={{min: 3}/> // The minimum allowed value is 3
  <InputField name="faveName" label="Favourite cat name" validation={{maxLength: 20}} /> // the maximum allowed length is 20
  <Button>Submit</Button>
</Form>
```

Note that when specifying a `pattern`, the `value` is a `RegExp`. For the other basic properties listed here, `value` is a `number`.

### Custom validation

The `validate` property accepts a function of type `(value: any) => boolean | string`. Its single argument is the current value of the field. It should return `true` if the value passes validation and a `string` containing an error if not.

```tsx center
<Form>
  <InputField
    name="faveVowel"
    label="Favourite vowel"
    validation={{
      validate: (value) =>
        ['A', 'E', 'I', 'O', 'U'].contains(value) || "That's not a vowel!"
    }}
  />
  <Button>Submit</Button>
</Form>
```

> ### Basic processing

Reviewer: I don't fully understand this, lets walk through this during our call

Author: Happy to talk through it in more depth, but basically these options allow the form to process `string` data into another type (`number` or `date`). Or you can provide a custom function to process it.

This is an option provided by `react-hook-form`. I'm not totally convinced that it's any more useful than manually processing the data in the `onSubmit` function, but I thought we might as well support it given that it's so easy to.
